I've many questions concerning our
government's handling of the corona
virus but this morning I read according
to statistics from John Hopkins
University Sweden has 28 deaths for
100,000 inhabitants Norway has 4 deaths
100,000 inhabitants Denmark has 8.7
Finland has 4.5 even the USA has less
than the UK at 21 point seven so they're
all lower than the UK which has a
nationwide lockdown when the toll is
significantly higher of forty four point
four perpend inhabitants my question is
why and how did the government let this
happen when we had advance warning of
the figures coming out in other
countries as a country were meant to be
celebrating VE Day tomorrow
but who feels like celebrating I don't
feel particularly proud of being British
when I see figures like that Chris let's
start with you well the death rate is
clearly very concerning and we can talk
about numbers but behind each individual
number there is a personal tragedy for
both the individual concern but also
their relatives and family so what do
you think when you hear Margaret lists
those numbers like that well I um it's
very concerning and if you look at the
levels of mortality that we have in this
country I do think though when I talk to
my public health colleagues what they
say to me is just be very careful about
making international comparisons at this
point because there are a number of
different reasons as to why different
countries may have different death rates
for example there isn't a single
Universal way of recording coronavirus
and I think around I guess that's
something the government have been very
key to say but nonetheless whether we're
the worst in you we've got the highest
death toll in the Europe or the second
highest debt only or maybe even the
third it's not worrying what we want to
be and Margaret's question is why why
has this happened what's your view given
you're at the coalface with the
ambulance workers and the hospital
workers what well I I'm quite rightly
Margaret wants an answer to that
question given the levels of deaths that
we've had I mean the reality is we are
gonna have to
to do the real detailed analysis to find
out what has happened here and I think
as I said it's dangerous and that's
certainly what our public health expert
colleagues say to draw conclusions at
this point but clearly we're 30,000
deaths it is a real issue I think there
are some conclusions we can draw i'm not
party to the intelligence and
information the government has but I
remember in February two local schools
where I live in South London were closed
because of a corona virus outbreak and
concerns the infection spreading by then
other countries were already
implementing lockdown measures and it
was weeks before our government started
to take this seriously and I think that
Margaret's question which is a really
sad one and an honest one to hear has
kind of two components one why has the
government handled it this way why is
everything taken so long why do we
always feel like we're playing catch-up
on PPE on lockdown measures and then the
second component is is the government's
tone because for me to hear our
government congratulating itself on the
way it's handled this outbreak so Boris
Johnson called it our apparent success
it's it's insulting to the people who
continue to die every day and what I
would like to see is some honesty from
the government acknowledging that this
was not well handled that mistakes have
been made and telling us clearly and
transparently what they intend to do
differently because at the moment the
gulf between what we're experiencing the
number of people who are dying the
heartbreaking scenarios of people dying
alone often in unnecessary circumstances
because we haven't got a grip on this
and the government's rhetoric is only
losing further trust and I think that
Trust is important right now and until
the government shows some honesty and
integrity we can't even begin to see how
we can move forward and yet I saw you
and you are nodding at that well yeah I
mean I think I think Margaret's question
is absolutely spot-on and what you said
in your question Margaret is that we we
didn't plan ahead so we're managing this
in the here-and-now
and that makes managing a crisis like
this unbelievably difficult and I think
you know we should say we should say you
thank you to all of the people who are
doing that but what should have happened
is we should have spent much more time
planning early on and we saw the signs
from Italy and we knew that we had to
put testing capacity in place and we do
do that early enough and we didn't lock
down fast enough you know there should
have been a hard fast lockdown and in
hindsight we know that would have been
better but we just didn't plan well
enough ahead I'm afraid it's interesting
because in February the UK was ranked
second best place to deal with the
pandemic this is by the global health
security index Margaret saying how how
is the government let it happen where
we've got a death toll as we have Nick
well it clearly isn't for celebrations
it's an extraordinary tragedy for our
country and a tragedy but each and every
family and to see that figure today of
over thirty thousand six hundred deaths
was startling and shopping so what did
you think when the Prime Minister
described it as a nap as I talked about
our response to the pandemic as our
apparent success well it's not a success
or an apparent success the owner and
throughout this crisis we've quite
rightly supported the government in its
aim of minimizing loss of life but we've
also pulled out things when we thought
the government wasn't acting quite the
way that it should and there are
questions about how well-prepared the
country was for this particular type of
pandemic but we were also slow into
lockdown slow in terms of a
comprehensive testing and tracing
strategy and there have been significant
problems between what the government is
said is available in terms of personal
protective equipment and what's actually
got to the frontline and you say Nick
you say that the government was - sorry
Nick cutting across you you say the
government was too slow in introducing
the lockdown was labour calling for the
lockdown to be introduced earlier yes
yes absolutely the owner I was there
actually in the House of Commons on the
23rd of March and we actually call for
the lockdown in the House of Commons
prior to it being announced later that
day and I think that was some angry we
raised on for the house that day but
what about earlier than that because I
was also just a few hours earlier if
you're saying that government was too
late in introducing a lockdown but you
don't mean by a few hours
what was I I don't really recall that
but maybe I missed it labor calling for
a lockdown in February say for example
know what we some what we tried to do
throughout this crisis is to be
supportive theum you asked me about when
we called the locker I was sacked in the
House of Commons on the day that we did
but the point that I'm making really is
that of course we will come to a point
in the future when we must look very
robustly with great scrutiny as to what
the government did and what differently
it could have done throughout this
crisis we have to answer that fashion as
to why we've ended up with this tragic
death toll as we have but at the same
time we can't simply say this is
something for the future I hope the
government with learning lessons as it
is going along on the issues of testing
and tracing on the issues of personal
protective equipment to try to minimize
loss like going forward
George apparent success is that how you
describe it well look what the Prime
Minister was describing there is what
we've all done as a country people
who've stayed at home observed social
distancing our fabulous NHS and
everybody else who's responded to this
crisis is all to save lives and we now
we are in time and it is right to
acknowledge the steps that everyone has
taken and that's all the Prime Minister
is doing look I think the point I'd say
here is it's very difficult to make
these international comparisons because
different countries are recording deaths
in different ways different countries
have different circumstances London is a
huge city with a big public transport
system that could have had an impact
early on there will be a time and a
place to reflect and learn lessons from
no we are dealing with this interesting
about that is is I've I've watched every
one of as you would expect in this job
every one of the press conferences of
five o'clock since this started and any
at the beginning in the first month or
so when he was showing those
International comparisons there was no
reference to the fact that those
competitors might be a bit dodgy when we
were below the other European courtesy
now that we're above them you're very
the governor a keen to point out that we
shouldn't be making this comparisons but
it never said that we weren't making
comparisons we've always tracked the
death rates that have been reported in
all countries he didn't warn us off them
followed the advice of the chief medical
officer on our chief scientific adviser
and the the the belief all along I think
was correct is that we were roughly two
to three weeks behind countries like
Italy and France we were on a different
trajectory that's why wasn't appropriate
to lock down at the point that they did
but it's not true that we weren't
prepared there were all sorts of Cobra
meetings and planning meetings that were
taking place on this right from January
onwards it was occupying all of Matt
Hancock's
time so lots and lots of planning and
preparation went into responding to this
but it was the case that the scientific
advice was not that we should look I
should have locked down earlier than we
did
as soon as the advice was that we should
not Jane it's exactly what we see you
think you sorry what I mean by honestly
the government has been changing its
narrative to fit its results so
initially we liked international
comparisons because they made us look
good
now they make us look bad we can't trust
them the advice on PPE was to use the
PPE recommended by the World Health
Organization until it emerged we didn't
have it and then the PP advice was
changed to fit what we have the
definition of testing was changed when
it emerged we couldn't meet the hundred
thousand tested a standard we promised
until we suddenly could by changing what
counts as a test a test having been sent
out rather than a result having been
received and for those of us who are
medical experts who are just members of
the public watching people we know and
love died there is an unavoidable
feeling that the government is not being
honest with us about the scale of this
crisis yes we've all done everything we
can to try and mitigate this and we are
all trying to come together and help
that doesn't make this a success this
makes us people who are suffering and
doing our absolute best in circumstances
where we can't help but feel that the
leadership has failed us and I think we
deserve an honest acknowledgement of
that well it's simply not true that
there's been dishonesty or anything in
this from the very beginning we've been
holding daily press conferences the
chief medical officer has been attending
many of those and they've been very very
candid about the nature of this crisis
the reasons were doing the things that
we're doing very candid about the
evidence and the epidemiology behind it
so we've been
I think is Frank as possible with the
public and we've shared with them all of
our thinking every six
I think I think the bit that does need
to be recognized here is if you wind
back 1012 weeks and we were looking at
and what had happened in northern Italy
where their health system had been
completely overwhelmed and we have the
awful prospect of people turning up to
hospitals and simply not being able to
be treated and I think the bit that we
do need to recognize is that the NHS has
actually created 33,000 beds to treat
coronavirus patients we've created seven
Nightingale hospitals
literally within the space of a
fortnight it's not work we have so well
with the care absolutely we recognize
and I think everybody at the Health and
Care System would recognize it's not
work so well with care homes but all I'm
saying is if you look at that prospect
the NHS was really clearly told you have
to do everything to avoid that overwhelm
and I think the bit that we do need to
recognize because it's due to the hard
effort of a million frontline staff is
that we have managed to avoid that
overwhelm and as I said it's very
difficult in the sense to kind of talk
about celebration when we're talking
about this in the context of Margaret's
question of 30,000 we should recognize
so why do you think I mean George is
saying we did everything at the right
time lockdown was done at the right time
why do you think then if that is true
not according to you after why do you
think we have so many deaths well I
think it's really difficult to tell at
this point funeral as I said I know that
people quite rightly want the answers
but there are potentially lots of
reasons if you look at population
density is clearly one I think you
raised quite correctly the fact that our
social care sector has been completely
neglected and we know that what happens
in a crisis is that the crisis
inevitably finds the weakest link in
terms of the area that's been under
invested in that hasn't been sorted out
so there are there are some reasons I'm
sure but all I'm saying is we need to be
careful about jumping to immediate
conclusions on the basis of to be frank
in complete evidence at this point Nick
I think yeah you know I mean you know
all this discussion about comparisons
and we're not sure I mean I think the
data is good enough for us
to say that a country like ours like
Britain with all of its Cape of
we should have we should have done
better we should be doing better there's
no doubt about that in my mind and I
think in terms of the planning I'd like
come to but to come back to this point
of testing you know we didn't plan ahead
well enough if we if we would have done
we would have had the tests of the
hundred thousand in place by the
beginning of April not started building
it at the beginning of April so I think
there were some key lessons and I do
think you know we've got a long way to
go we need to live and manage this
situation and I do agree with that first
point that a bit of honesty a bit of
learning so that we can learn as we go
into the next phase and really make sure
that we we make a better job as we now
try and exit out of this out of this
terrible situation it you you had your
hand that you want to come in I mean
George is saying that government has
been candid throughout do you feel that
well the government has been
inconsistent not least around the issue
of testing and tracing the lockdown was
absolutely essential but it was a blunt
instrument unless you had a testing in
tracing strategy now the government was
actually doing community testing but it
stopped doing that on the 12th of March
originally it was said that was a policy
decision but more lately it seems it's
been admitted that was because of the
lack of capacity now it took weeks and
weeks up for that for the government to
then start to actually ramp up testing
to the level that it needed to be at but
it's not got to that yet and I'm afraid
that hitting the target on the 30th of
April it seems that that was done by
putting a number of tests in the post
without an actual guarantee that those
tests have been used and we've seen the
test numbers again falling below 100,000
in recent days now that needs to be
wrapped up again very significantly and
it needs to be attached to a proper
tracing strategy and that really has to
be a focus now for the government in the
weeks ahead let me come back to Margaret
so Margot you sat here very patiently
and listened to that and thank you for
that
you said figures like the ones you
quoted don't make you feel proud to be
British what do you feel about the
responses you've heard
oh just disappointed they haven't really
answered anything and I agree with some
of the points we've got to wait and see
however so what would your quick we've
got we've got George Eustace here from
the government what would your question
be directly to him why didn't they have
testing peepee
earlier what the government must have
known about it
well we have ramped up testing
considerably so that's not the question
the question is why didn't you have it
earlier well there are some countries
that had more diagnostic labs so
countries like Germany had a lot of
those diagnostic labs we had to expand
them from scratch and the army have been
involved in this and done a fantastic
job we've now got 90 mobile testing
units around the country 50
drive-throughs could you have wrapped it
up earlier I mean there's been enormous
as quickly as they could and we're now
at that hundred thousand capacity and
it's going to double again over the next
month we will be ramping it up further
Margaret does that satisfy you
no no I should praise for the NHS I'm
not criticising the NHS I think they've
done a wonderful job and criticizing the
government's lack of preparedness
[Music]
you